---
layout: post
title: Code Force 273 (Div2) 
comments: true
category: Codeforce
tag: algorithm, leetcode, DP, palindrome
---


# Question A

Very simple and naive question. One thing worth noticing is that $$b > 0$$.

{% highlight c++%}
int main(){
    int sum = 0;
    int tp;
    for(int i = 0; i < 5; ++ i){        
        cin >> tp;
        sum += tp;
    }
    if (sum%5 == 0 && sum)
        cout << sum/5 << endl;
    else
        cout << -1 << endl;
    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}


# Question B

It is not hard to guess the two extreme cases with minimum  and maximum number of relationship. For minimum number of relationships, we strive to distribute all ``n`` people to ``m`` groups. For maximum number of relationships, we should try our best to centralize all people in one group. Then the computation is trivial. One important thing is that ``n`` can be $$1e9$$, which results in a very large number of relationships. Thus we should use ``long long`` (even double fails because of precision..).


{% highlight c++ %}
int main(){
    long long n, m;
    cin >> n >> m;
    long long mx = (n-m+1)*(n-m)/2;
    long long mod = n%m;
    long long quo = n/m;
    long long mi = (m-mod) * (quo * (quo-1))/2 + mod * (quo * (quo+1))/2;
    printf("%I64d %I64d\n", mi, mx);    

    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}


# Question C

The solution to this problem is a greedy solution, which is very short. The restriction is that we cannot have three balloons with the same color at the same table.

The key ideas are

- As every table has three balloons, the number of the table must be lower than $$(r+g+b)/3$$
- We cannot have a number of tables that exceeds any of $$(r+g)$$, $$(g+b)$$, or $$(r+b)$$. This is because, for example, if there is an additional table besides the $$r+g$$ tables, this table must be of three **blue** balloons

{% highlight c++%}
int main()
{
    long long r,g,b;
    cin>>r>>g>>b;
    cout << min(min(min((r+g+b)/3,r+g),g+b),r+b);
}
{% endhighlight %}

# Question D

This is a DP problem. I have not figured it out yet. To be continued...